hello I'm Rob with the bee and this is
101 ways to make fire last time we spoke
about the properties of wood the
physical properties would that make it
suitable for making friction fires I
also showed you my hand crank drill and
indulged in some gratuitous sexual
innuendo with my lady friend Roberta
today we're going to find out which
woods to use
in South Africa there are more than a
thousand species of indigenous tree
about 400 just in the area where I live
and that's excluding exotic trees garden
shrubs all of that statistically you
probably from a completely different
part of the world so instead of just
recommending a whole list of species
that are going to work which you're
probably not going to be able to find in
your neck of the woods I'm going to talk
about the general properties that you're
looking for in a timber which will make
it suitable for liking a friction fire
this is a piece of penis patella yes I
said penis that's Latin for pine
specifically Mexican weeping pine which
is commonly planted commercially here in
South Africa this is an example of
something that's not going to work it is
a resinous timber the resin acts is a
lubricant and instead of forming an
ember the wood gets polished and buffed
up and it just doesn't work it also has
an obvious grain which I hope you can
see there generally that's not what you
want you're looking for wood with a
consistent texture for the same reason
you want to avoid knots in your wood the
spine is is very naughty it is a nutty
nutty wood what you are looking for is
wood that is light strong and fibrous
this usually comes from a fast growing
plant often something growing in
disturbed areas with a high water table
many of these will be primary or
secondary vegetation often called weeds
okay let's go and find some wood wrong
way it's that way
okay beyond me as an old gravel pit
where they took out full material to
build the road that was probably 40
years ago before my time and we've been
trying to rehabilitate it in the
meantime but it's still very much
disturbed with a lot of alien invasive
vegetation which is a bad thing but
today it makes my job much easier
because that right there is what I'm
looking for something called bug weed or
colloquially wild tobacco I'm gonna head
down into the Dongo view and try to find
some dead wood these things quite often
get killed by passing felt fires whoo
slippery ouch oh oh okay this is a bad
idea all in the name of science
balancing I've got about a fall off wool
slippery when wet remind me whose stupid
idea this was
eat your heart out bear grylls but pop
rested luery and while I'm here I want
to show you something else
bracket fungus otherwise known as tinder
fungus maybe not
the tinder fungus but this is probably
going to work instead of char cloth so
we taken that with us home sweet home
Cheers it was a good day's hunting to
the victor the spoils